Education in the quarantine
Good afternoon to all of you,
welcome to the Going Digital.
Specifically, at the discussion panel
about quarantine, distance or digital education.
Before we get to the actual discussion
and introduction of guests,
allow me a few words about
the organization of the panel.
The panel will be divided into two parts,
in the first part we will discuss three sub-topics,
all related to quarantine education.
Specifically, we will be talking
about the so-called digital divide
in the context of the ongoing
global covid-19 pandemic.
Then, we will be concerned
with the question of education reform.
Is it needed to reform
education in the Czech Republic
in connection with the current pandemic.
Next sub-topic,
that we called the "clash of generations",
Do young teachers and young students
actually clash there with the older generation
in the context of digital education?
In the second part,
it's time for your questions,
which you can send them in chat
during the discussion.
So if, at any time during the discussion,
you have a question for some of the guests
do not hesitate to ask.
And last but not least, I would ask you
to turn off your microphones and webcams.
The whole discussion should last
maximum of 60 minutes.
Before we move on to the discussion,
let me welcome Mr. Adam Lalák,
who is the head of research at Scio schools,
where he focuses on innovative education
or alternative ways of education.
Good afternoon
Then welcome Mr. Josef Kundrát,
who is not physically with us, but at least online,
who works at the Faculty of Arts of the
University of Ostrava, at the Department of Psychology.
In his field he deals with the psychology
of education or alternative education.
Good afternoon Mr. Kundrat.
Hello everyone, I hope you can hear me.
Yes, we can hear you well.
Next, please welcome Mr. Štěpán Kment,
who is an analyst at EDUin,
Information Center for Education
and is also a co-author of the
revision of the Czech education system.
Good afternoon.
Hello, I probably wouldn't say
that I am a co-author,
but somehow I participated.
So you are involved in the revision.
Next I welcome Mrs. Petra Mazancová,
a teacher from the Josef Jungmann grammar school
and at the same time, chairwoman of the
Teachers platform. Welcome here.
Good afternoon.
And last but not least,
I welcome Mrs. Jana Urbanová,
English teacher who has experience
from a language school
and a primary school in Prague. Good afternoon
Good afternoon.
Why do we have the topic of digital education
or quarantine education at this conference
which concerns the digital agenda?
This is obvious, because the coronavirus
pandemic forced us to move
from full-time education to distance learning.
It forced us to use more of digital
technologies for educational purposes,
Specifically the Internet
and various Internet platforms.
In this regard, we should ask,
has the Czech Republic managed
this transition to distance education?
What are we lagging behind
and what, on the contrary,
has succeeded or what has failed?
Mr Lalák, can you comment on whether
the Czech Republic has been successful,
if we take into account the forced
transition to distance learning?
I have a feeling that the success rate
was not completely high,
especially in the first wave of the pandemic,
it was really very difficult.
In fact, thousands of children were not
connected to the distance learning at all.
Entire schools and entire regions had
great difficulties adapting to this.
I think it revealed several things
about the Czech education system.
The first, important thing is that,
it showed the great rigidity of that system,
Which we already knew about.
The educational school system has really
been going on the same way for decades.
Just few things are changing.
There are few changes. There are small demands
on teachers to adapt to new things.
We have never had such an experience here
that we would have to adapt something quickly.
Unlike, for example,
the countries of Southeast Asia,
where they already experienced a pandemic
17 years ago
and those schools
have since been much more flexible
and were systematically preparing
for such shocks in the system.
At the same time, it can be seen
that the system is terribly bureaucratic.
There is too much legislation and regulation,
which reduces flexibility
and the ability of the system
to face new challenges.
For example, in order to become a teacher
in the Czech Republic,
one must graduate from the Faculty of Education
or have a pedagogical education.
The system is terribly impermeable,
and those people who teach there,
usually do the same thing all their lives,
often still teaching only at that one school.
They are not flexible
I would dare to speculate,
although I do not have the data,
that people who teach at school
and have worked in some other work before,
so they managed to adapt better in this aspect,
but we just do not have so many
those people in the Czech Republic.
And then it showed other things
about the Czech education system.
I think there was a big failure in the management
of those schools,
because school principals are often primarily
educators and not so good managers.
They couldn't make sure that the teachers
worked really well in this new regime.
At the same time, it showed inequalities
in the Czech education, we will get to that later.
There are huge differences between
schools across the Czech Republic.
You might encounter on the so-called digital
divide which actually showed itself.
The pandemic showed the digital divide
not only in the Czechia, but in whole Europe.
What the digital divide actually means?
It is a situation
where some have access to quality internet,
have digital skills, the necessary hardware equipment
but others do not.
Štěpán Kment and now I would like to address you,
do you see the issue of digital divide,
as a problem in the Czechia?
How big is this problem
and how would you solve it?
There are available OECD data,
which found out if kids have computer
and an internet connection.
If I remember correctly, the number of children
who did not have the equipment
was about five percent,
but here we have to talk about
if those children who answered
"yes I have a computer at home"
so if they shared it
with one, two, three siblings.
Naturally, if the siblings were also
required by the school for such distance learning,
it caused problems when they had to
somehow take turns with the device,
especially during synchronous lessons
, lessons which are held online.
In the post that
I filmed for your conference last night,
I mentioned that the Czech education system
has one such disgrace,
I named it as a disgrace in data collection
Namely, that the Czech educational system
is not able to identify the needful pupils
and it actually does it as intuitively
For example,
school inspectorates ascertained successful strategies
for educating socioeconomically
disadvantaged students.
And in order to select these students,
it actually cooperated with teachers
and principals to be able to identify them.
It seems pretty unreal to me,
it seems incredible to me, it is very bad.
I gave an example from Great Britain
where eligibility for free lunch,
shows that the child is needful.
And the fact that we did not have any such
indicator at the beginning of the pandemic.
We had no indication that this is a child
who needs more resources for education,
because of course we have known for decades
that children who come from, simply said,
from worse families.
Education is more difficult for them,
due to less cultural capital,
less family support and so on.
And when we entered to the pandemic
without knowing
who are these children and especially in
which schools they are being educated,
Typically if the school, for example,
has a catchment area
and saying the school is attended by
40% of children who are eligible for free lunch,
Now giving an analogous example
from Great Britain,
Then we know that this school
needs significantly more resources,
it needs much more care, it needs more support
and teachers are incredibly busier.
They are much busier than teachers
who teach in schools
which middle class children attend.
If I simplify it.
So, I see the unpreparedness
of the Czech system in this.
I see it in the fact that we don't even know
what we don't have.
Then we just lament that there are inequalities
and we lack any tools to solve them.
And I think
we place uneven demands on teachers and schools,
because every teacher naturally has to meet
a different type of pupil,
but this educational policy does not
actually reflect that.
Now it is time to turn directly to people
who work directly in schools.
Petro Mazancová, you are a grammar school teacher
and the chairwoman of the Teachers platform,
Do you agree with what was said here?
or how do you perceive the digital divide
in the Czech Republic?
I understand that we are at a Pirate conference
and the digital divide sounds
tempting and attractive.
But we have the divie mainly because
not every child has access to a good school.
The fate in the Czech Republic,
yours and yours' child
depends very much on
how good is the school you go to.
Currently, it is a catchment school,
or a school that your parents chose for you,
because they had enough cultural, economic,
social background to be able to choose.
And they were able to do something,
so you can attend the better school.
So, in my opinion, the biggest problem
of the Czech Republic in terms of education
is the significant differences
between primary schools.
The differences are huge
and the coronavirus crisis just showed it
We had it that way, but it was not visible
And now it's just too much visible,
how the approaches of those schools differ.
Jana Urbanová,
do you have a similar opinion as a teacher ,
who has experience from a language school
and primary school?
Do you see the digital divide?
I will use that term.
It is a term commonly used for the this divide.
Do you agree with your previous speaker
with what she said?
Certainly, as I have experience from public school
and from a private school,
I was doing distance learning
from a private school,
where the equipment was very good,
and I think you can see big differences,
not only between schools,
but also between individual children
and teachers, as they dealt with it.
I will return to the question of
how the Czech Republic managed it,
I wouldn't see it so badly.
I wouldn't say we didn't make it or did it wrong.
But we did it a lot differently,
everyone handled it as he should.
I must say, what we didn't do
very well was support from above,
some systematic support that
would help teachers to handle the situation.
and I must say that although
they had almost zero support,
I think the vast majority of them
handled it very well.
Of course, there are exceptions
when someone didn't make it.
But I think that, given the situation that arose
and how quickly we had to deal with it,
and how little resources
and support we had from above,
it actually worked out very well.
Everyone did what he could.
Mr. Kundrat, you as an academic psychologist,
who focuses on the psychology of education
and measuring the effectiveness of teaching.
Have you noticed,
or are there data, or do you think
that the transition to distance learning
has had an adverse effect
on the effectiveness of education
and on the mental state of pupils and students?
Thank you, I don't have this data
for this at the moment.
I can´t answer.
I don't have my answer based on research.
I assume that the data will be created,
studies from the time of quarantine education
will be published.
I think it had an adverse effect on everyone,
the longer the situation is,
especially in the second wave.
It's not just students and teachers,
we all experience it.
It is necessary to agree with those
who have spoken before me,
that it is vastly different that experience.
Those who had good conditions from the start,
logically managed to do better
than those who are somehow disadvantaged.
Within one school, there can be hundreds of
different stories of how these people did it,
based on the conditions they had.
I wouldn't go with the term digital divide,
I don't think that's one big problem
It is not one big situation
that has one big solution.
I think that what is happening here
and the what pandemic revealed,
is there are thousands of minor problems.
Whether it is that in many families, pupils do not
have their own table where they can sit.
Because they don't have work desks at home,
for example, they have sofa there,
but it's not ergonomically good to sit there
all morning and work.
Other people have a problem
with the Internet connection,
someone who lives in the village
and is the last on the line,
and when the neighbors in front of him start
downloading movies or high-volume data packets,
the Internet simply slows down.
In another case, it may be the teacher
who does not have a good connection.
So I wouldn't see the digital divide as
one crucial thing that can be solved,
but more like the thousands of little pains
that just need to be taken away one by one.
The longer it lasts,
the more differences between those
who have the equipment
and do not, just deepen.
This brings us to the next point,
and that is actually how to change it
and what to do,
because it has been said here so far,
so it does not seem to be a problem
only in the education system,
but it is also related to social problems.
And not only when it comes to education,
but also when it comes to the
background of families and so on.
Štěpán Kment, as you said,
you participated in the revision.
Possible revision of the education
system in the Czech Republic.
So can you outline what you came up with?
What path should we take to deal
with this situation, we are talking.
I probably need to explain my involvement
in the preparation of the 2030 strategy.
I participated in the writing of the background document
"Main directions of educational policy"
when I worked at the Ministry of Education
last year for six months.
But I'm definitely not in a position
to answer that question.
It is a political question that you should
probably ask the Minister of Education
or, for example,
someone from the school committee.
What is in the Strategy of
Educational policy until 2030,
is that inequalities should be reduced
by reducing differences in quality of schools.
By introducing the so-called
middle link of support,
it means that the differences between schools
in the territory are balanced,
or that there is someone called a superintendent,
a person who would monitor the quality
of schools and provide the right support.
So that's the side of support
and then that side of accountability
that are always such 2 mainstreams push-pull.
In education, it is proposed through nodal points
when the ministry expects to test children.
It is not yet 100% clear whether it will be
mass testing, even if it looks like it,
pupils in the 3rd, 5th, 7th, 7th and 9th grades.
This data should provide information
on how schools are performing,
ideally if we are able to match that data
with other demographic indicators,
if we have good personnel capacity
in managing the system,
If there are qualified people, then
they can tell which schools perform worse,
and of course now there is the disclaimer
*the test measures just something*,
tests do not measure how teachers work,
for example, on the character of students,
how they work on some of their soft skills.
Mr. Lalák can certainly add to
how many things SCIO schools teach,
but test will not reflect it.
I think that Petra Mazancová while teaching English
also developing children in way,
that written tests can not capture.
This is the entry of that educational policy
into that of the current decades, 2020s.
as the Ministry of Education imagines
that it will reduce inequality,
and thus in the first three years more
focusing on selected regions,
where educational results are,
at least according to Pisa testing, the lowest
In comparison with other regions in the country,
it is the Karlovy Vary
and Ústí nad Labem regions,
so there would be other
special measures in 2021 to 2023.
Thank you. I can already
see the questions coming in the chat,
be sure to keep asking
and in a moment we'll get to them.
Now I would return back a little,
more to that digital dimension.
Mr Lalák, with regard to greater
involvement of digital technologies in education,
not only in the context of a pandemic
but in the future, in the 21st century.
Do you think it is necessary
and important for the future to
place more emphasis on students digital skills?
And do you think that in the future is necessary
to count on with more frequent distance learning?
And is it even desirable?
Definitely yes, that is without a doubt.
Like it or not, many of us spend most of our
working lives somewhere at the computer,
We are sitting in the office
and working in a virtual environment,
and it is simply appropriate for the schools
to prepare the children for it in some way,
and digital resources need to be more
integrated into that school environment.
I think that working more with
distance learning in the future
will definitely be needed as well.
Basically, one of the things we have learned
from distance learning in 2020,
is that distance learning is not so bad
and there are certain types of people,
whether they are pupils with special needs,
more introverted pupils
or very gifted pupils
who need study at their own pace.
These are the students,
whom this distance learning method,
where they organize the timetable
and lessons themselves. suits more.
And I think we should work with it more
and at the same time prepare those people
for the future
where it will be necessary to quickly adapt
to various unexpected changes in the system
and it will be necessary for these people
to be more independent
and have greater digital literacy.
Definitely we should start integrating
more distance learning
into the normal functioning of our schools.
and one example of how SCIO reacted
to this, is the Expeditionary School.
I talked about it in my post, which is a new
model that we are currently testing.
School where distance online teaching
is for three weeks a month
and the fourth week children are taught
physically through some experiential expedition.
It is one of many models and I think
that we should try to come up with more such models,
test what works, what suits to whom,
to what demographic group
and proceed in this direction.
Petra Mazancová, do you agree with this?
Because when I ask teachers in ordinary
schools about distance learning,
not that they would have a problem
that they could not handle it,
but according to them, it is simply not
as effective as regular full-time teaching.
Do you think that in the future we should
involve more distance learning?
Distance and digital education.
These are two different things, but ok.
I think that mainly
the narrative of society is not set up well.
From the beginning, we just keep talking
about getting the kids back to school,
let's get them back there quickly,
because what's going on at home right now,
isn't right.
I'm really outraged by such talks.
I'm tired of reacting to it.
I don't mean this conference
and this panel right now,
but it is so, and such a discourse in the sense
"A lost generation of children grows up"
which will be maximally affected by not
going to school for 6 months
When you notice that it is simply the mainstream
that goes in that public space
and it is very difficult to react to it.
The distance learning can simply be good,
it just depends on the specific school.
So it can be done well.
We have to overcome the narrative that is now
here that distance learning
will always be bad, and it's just a substitute for
not being able to go to school right now.
It can be very effective,
but we have to learn it.
Just as pupils and students learn it,
so do teachers and schools have to learn it.
So the future is in learning and not forgeting,
that during crises we managed a lot.
As teachers we were able to
learn a lot and move a lot.
We moved and learned more things
than any time, during all the entire career path.
All my colleagues
or the absolute majority of my colleagues
keep the elements of the distance education
even at a time when
they are already needed in full-time teaching..
They keep their digital classes open
and simply work with children and students
in a similar way as they were working
during that distance learning.
This means the trend of learning to work
with it is, in my opinion, crucial,
and I hope that we will keep it,
but it is really the public discourse.
Think how many petitions we had
in sense of returning children to schools,
the pressure on the Ministry of Education
and the Ministry of Health
in this direction was enormous.
I don't know if it was actually deliberated..
Instead of focusing on
how to improve distance learning,
we focused on returning to full-time
as soon as possible. I think it's a shame
Thank you,
you're right, we should use the term distance learning
rather than digital, because this part of panel
is mainly about distance learning.
Jana Urbanová the same question to you
as a teacher from practice,
What is your experience with distance learning?
And do you think it's good to put more
emphasis on it in the future,
and we shouldn't be as afraid of it as
we ever hear in that mainstream?
I think that purely distance learning
is reserved for those special occasions,
such as pandemics or crisis situations.
It could certainly be a way, an alternative
approach, but it would not be for everyone
It's the same as with any unusual method,
to someone it suits more, someone less.
Both among teachers and among children.
And I can imagine
that there are a lot of children and teachers,
who could be educated in this way primarily.
But even
where it would not be directly in this form,
it is worth taking at least some elements
involve them in that "normal teaching".
After we return to the old ways,
combined teaching will still have its future.
Mr Kunrát, you have already touched
on this topic in your introductory speech.
So briefly, in your opinion, is distance learning
and a greater emphasis
on distance learning desirable?
I would agree with the other speakers,
I will take it from
the point of view of college teacher.
And if we do not stick only to the idea of
distance learning in primary and secondary schools.
So I can absolutely imagine
that within universities,
the distance lectures can fully
replace full-time teaching.
Of course, seminars
and exercises are something else.
There the personal contact is irreplaceable.
But I can imagine that a lot of students
may have trouble with commuting
and with balancing work duties and studying.
So they can attend lectures remotely,
without these problems.
Of course, the younger the pupils and are,
the harder it would be to fully replace it.
However, I agree that some elements
should be retained.
Mainly because our and global
society is in a unique situation.
I can't imagine what would happen if
there was no pandemic in 2020, and we announced
that we will move to half a year of online
education as part of an experiment.
I can't imagine the reactions of the
professional public to this
Now we have been forced into such a situation.
And it would be a pity to leave the "best"
thing that the situation offered us,
that we were looking for new ways, to leave
it completely and return it to normal.
I agree with my colleague Urbanova on this.
Such an observation I have about it,
every teacher has some cognitive
resources, he has some capacity.
The more students in the class,
the more difficult it is for him to pay attention
to everyone, whether in person
or in distance learning.
I would like to suggest that full-time and
distance learning could be more effective
if we could reduce
the number of pupils in the classroom.
This means having more teachers
or learning better to use assistants.
My experience is that many teachers
cannot use the full potential of assistants.
And nowadays, it could turn out to have
something like a digital assistant,
or have a pedagogical assistant for
distance learning, that can run in parallel
with the full-time one,
it could be beneficial.
For example, for students who are slightly ill
and unable to attend school,
or for some reason they are educated remotely.
In the future, this could be one of the ways
Better using of assistants and,
if possible, fewer pupils in the classroom.
But this is an opinion that must be
evaluated by teachers who teach
who are teaching in those primary
and secondary schools,
not me from the position of a university teacher.
Thank you, Mr Lalák, I would like to follow up,
all the speakers agree that distance
learning is not a bad word
and we could use it more in the future.
You as an expert who deals with
alternative ways of education
Don't you feel any effects on students'
concentration when they are taught online?
Doesn't that have a negative effect
on their concentration?
Well, I think it's definitely
more challenging in some ways
because indeed the distance learning
places slightly different demands
on each student, because he needs
to plan the lessons himself.
He needs to decide what he will be doing.
He needs to decide where he will be studying,
if he will be in the living room,
kitchen or bedroom.
and there are a lot of things
that just put certain obstacles.
But I think people can learn a lot from it.
Distance learning is a very effective way
to develop some independence.
This is called self-regulation of those students
It means somehow organizing their own time,
because that is then the thing
they will use the most in their lives.
So I think that even though
there may be some lower concentration,
it's useful for something, because those
people will learn to actively work
with lack of concentration and
somehow process it and overcome it.
Thank you, I would now like
to turn to the third topic,
which I have named as a clash of generations
And now I would turn to teachers from practice.
I would like to ask, technology is moving
forward at a tremendous speed
and distance learning, requires some
practice and digital skills,
and some work with technology and the Internet.
But it can often be a problem for older teachers,
so I want to ask Petra Mazancová
and Jano Urbanova,
of course it's not your problem,
but you certainly know older educators
for whom it may be a problem
to adapt to distance education,
I want to ask Mrs. Mazancová
if she has any colleagues who complain about it
and do not receive enough support
and it is difficult for them
to adapt to the situation.
You've already answered, it's about the support
I know a few younger colleagues
who just don't want to do it
and I have the example of a 70-year-old
professor at our grammar school,
who was an understudy normally teaches French
online so well that children are excited.
It's a bit of a cliché,
on the other hand we must realize
that the average age of a
Czech teacher is simply 50 years.
That is a fact, that is how far we let it
go as sociaty, with not supporting teachers.
It's just that the generation of teachers
has aged and it's all about the support.
I'm the ICT coordinator at our school
and if you have a person who works well
in that school and can pass experience on to you
and he can help you when you need to turn
to him as a teacher, so nothing is problem.
For example we are relatively rigid grammar
school in the Ústí nad Labem region,
but all the teachers switched to online,
some easier, some with some difficulties,
all were supported by principal and
people who knew it and could teach them,
but they managed it. So in my opinion,
the crucial thing is how well the school is run
And how much it will support its teachers
in doing it.
So I would definitely repeat
again that the cliché
the old don't want to have anything
to do with technology but the young
use two or three new applications every hour"
in my opinion doesn't apply at all
and it's just about some
willingness to lifelong learning.
Be honest, some teachers dont
desire for lifelong learning
they have feeling, that once they graduated
from Faculty of Education at the age of 26,
they dont need to learn anyting new.
Thats's just a general problem,
not only with digital technologies.
So I will definitely defend older teachers.
We talked about some need for support
during the transition to distance education
and now I would ask Jana Urbanová,
because Mr. Karel Gargulák asks in the chat:
A question for a teacher from practice,
what do they think is the ideal support
for the transition to distance education
and in general about digital skills,
what schools were missing
and what was missing from the system as a whole?
I definitely think there are two levels.
First, it is a long-term support for teachers
to be ready for such situations.
And then about what was missing at that
moment, when did this situation arise.
I think that what was missing
at the time this situation arose
was definitely some clear information.
A quick decision to let us know what to do.
At the beginning, no one really knew
anything and it was "somehow deal with it"
and it was the biggest problem.
So we shall come with changes, from day to day.
And I think, this was'nt just about
clash of generations, I completely agree with
that it's not so that older teachers
have a problem with technologies
and younger ones don't.
But suddenly is something wanted,
from day to day, with minimal support
or information on how to achieve this.
So I missed this, clear instructions
on what to do here.
Even from the beginning, no one knew
if we should teach all subjects,
whether we should also assign tasks
from physical education or not,
In fact, the information was very unclear
from the beginning.
And that's why the beginning of spring
was so stressful for everyone.
In the long term, I think it is a good
long-term training for teachers,
which would be easily accessible and made sense,
because, as my colleague Mazancová said,
many teachers are not even interested in it
and those who are, often come across the fact
that those available courses do not
have much benefit in practice
and they do not see much meaning
in those courses.
So I understand that people who want to
continue their education are discouraged
by going to a few courses like that and find out
that it didn't give them much into practice.
Mr. Karel Gargulák follows up on his question
and I would address it to Mr. Kundrát,
it has perhaps a bit of a philosophical nature.
What should the teacher know,
what requirements meet, for distance learning,
modern teaching?
What should he be like? Do you think,
that to gain those teachers, we need to create
new educational programs
or change the whole system?
Personally, I believe that a good
teacher a hundred years ago
and a good teacher today should
have more or less similar skill sets.
Let's remember the good teachers
who were teaching us, when we were in primary
or in secondary school.
They were a role models for us,
they passed values to us,
they valued us in some way as students,
and they were willing
to do something more, one extra mile.
Simply said, people with whom we felt good.
And for me, if the teacher has these
characteristics and is integrated personality,
ot doesn't matter if he teaches via a webcam
or if he is with the pupils in person
it won't matter if he teaches via a webcam
or if he is with the pupils in person.
This is really the medium which we can work with.
So the core just has to stay good,
a mature personality who just wants to do it,
person who is close to those students
and a quality teacher-student relationship
can be established there.
And whether the situation will be
implemented via the Internet
or simply face-to-face, that's a bit of
a secondary question, I think.
Of course where to find the teacher now?
I'm looking in the chat,
I think it's really necessary to start
with those pedagogical faculties, with
education of these teachers and the system.
but these are questions
that I really do not know if is it good to ask
to an educational psychologist,
these are questions that are good
to point to the establishment.
How to actually work with the system
of teacher education?
Maybe I would like to comment
on what has been said here before.
I recently came across a team that I really liked and it was "digital clumsiness".
It's not a term that would
mean as a rejection of technology
or something like a rigid attitude
"I won't teach online, it's just for the young".
The experience is that a lot of those teachers
just want, but they are not as familiar
to the online / digital world as,
for example, those younger colleagues
or as the students.
They need to be supported and with some
care they overcome this digital clumsiness.
And these are often quite simple
issues that are easy to solved
but in the overall context, they just
need the systematicall support.
As it said before, I wouldn't look for the problem
in the willingness of those people,
but I return to what I said in the beginning,
small solutions of small problems,
that the practice simply brings and the possibilities
to help overcome these little troubles.
Thank you, we have more and more
questions, now from Václav Kubaljak.
Perhaps I would ask Mr Štěpán Kment.
This year, the Ministry of Education
distributed 1.3 billion CZK
for technology to primary schools.
It was supposed to be
about 20,000 CZK per full-time teacher,
do you perceive this investment as sufficient?
I am asking you because you have some
experience with the Ministry of Education
and the National Institute for
Education and with the revision,
so what do you think about that?
Well, I certainly can't stand up
for the institutions you mentioned.
However, here we need to consider
whether the money went where it was needed,
respectively ,if I'm not mistaken,
the money went to elementary schools
did not go to high school and we have to ask
f the children who really needet
this equipment, if they got it?
then arises a question
when the money came to the schools at all,
And if the schools were able to buy
adequate equipment with the money.
So here is few questions which we need to ask.
All planning was also very weird.
The Ministry of Education rushed in very late,
they werent dealith with it during summer,
when schools had time to buy it,
identify their needs and
report it to the ministry.
As Petra Mazancova writes in the chat,
it should not be widespread with small amounts,
some schools need much more
and some dont need even one device.
So I am returning to the disgrace
of the Czech education system,
that we don't even know which schools
are more needed, which need more resources
we have no way to find out.
It is simply not a priority for us
and it is the biggest problem.
For example, today's panel would look
completely different if we had one indicator.
One mark that we could assign to schools,
pupils and we knew
that these schools in some territory
are simply more needfull
and we are directing money to them
and directing funds to them.
I would like to return a bit to the debate
that was about the portability
and usability of distance learning
after a pandemic or, in short,
during the normal functioning of schools
I think we should not forget that schools
are like a safe haven for children
and that they provide not only the academic side, but also the pastoral care.
Teachers have many social roles that
they simply can't fulfill online, it's impossible.
The child can hardly write to the teacher
"please set aside five minutes for me on Zoom,
I want to tell you
that I am not actually well at home,
and something bad is happening to me".
And it is often these moments
when a teacher who has trust of children,
hears during the break that something
unfair is happening, whether it is bullying,
whether it is some neglect at home
and has the opportunity to be the
first contact for the child.
It is important to recognize
this social function of the school or teacher,
The Pandemic Pedagogy, that I have read myself,
is incredibly beneficial.
But there are other roles that the school
will fill and that we should not forget.
PetroaMazancová, I have noticed
that you agree that it is difficult
almost impossible in this situation
detect the shortcomings in schools.
Is it really so and how to get out of it?
So how to detect shortcomings?
Where to direct support?
I just wanted to respond to Štěpán
about the social function of the teacher.
I would like to say that of course
it is absolutely essential,
on the other hand, in that pandemic
if you had a normal relation with those children,
so you found a lot of other ways
how those children can communicate with you.
I really dealt with a lot of crisis
interventions through chat,
which I would probably never do,
but it's a question
if the children came in person
or if using the chat wasn't easier
and more attractive for them at that moment.
They didn't have to look at me,
to look me in the eyes
when they said something that wasn't pleasant.
Of course it doesn't work
at the first stage of elementary school,
but at the second stage
and in our grammar school it worked very well.
And it is reflected to a large extent
but of course
this presupposes a relations already
created during full-time teaching
or the steduent saw the teacher
before they went home during the pandemic.
I'm sorry but can you repeat the question
what you asked
and I responded to Štěpán instead?
Yes, Štěpán Kment mentioned
that there are no data at all.
We do not know how to find out
which schools have what shortcomings
and where to direct support which they lack.
Is that really so and how to solve it?
I think Štěpán used the word disgrace
at the beginning,
and I thought it was a strong word,
but now I will proudly sign up for it.
It is a disgrace and, in my opinion,
it is a disgrace of the Ministry of Education.
That they just don't collect the data
I find it incredible that
we are actually in that pandemic,
let's say we count from March
and now is November, 8 months
and we still don't have accurate data
on those uninvolved children.
We only have some estimate of the Czech School
Inspectorate, which is from the spring
and which was actually created
on the basis of some telephone inquiry
from primary school principals.
So we don't even know how accurate it is.
Then there are situations that we have
a large number of non-profit organizations
that can help effectively, but they can
not just find those children in the system.
So they write to us, they write to
the teachers and so. I just don't understand
why the ministry won't treat it.
I've already talked
about it in several of my media appearances
in the sense that schools today report
a really huge amount of things,
so it would be relatively easy for them to report,
how many children are not involved.
Every teacher knows how many
uninvolved children he has in that class.
The fact that, we don't collect the data,
just doesn't make any sense to me
and I don't know why we don't do it.
It almost seems like we want to keep
an illusion that it's better than it really is,
and we're afraid to look to truth it in the eyes,
and say ok we just have 30,000 kids here
who are completely out of the system.
Which I think is a realistic estimate.
But we just need the data afterwards
and we miss it,
so the word disgrace, as it came to me as sharp,
so now it actually comes into its place.
I will return to
the question of Mrs. Helena Kotíková,
who asks if is at even possible to
effectively implement distance learning
for younger students, specifically
in the first and second grade.
Children must learn to read and count...
Mr. Lalák, do you think it is possible
at this age to learn such basics
as reading and writing in a distance way?
When we founded
the Expedition SCIO School this year,
we founded it for children from 4th to 9th grade,
We didn't include the first three years there
precisely because we felt a certain skepticism
about whether it was even possible
to learn to read, write and basic skills
just through distance learning.
In general I think, those children
at this age need much more support
from their parents. In fact, in some way,
parents have to be there with them.
They have to help a lot there.
In my opinion,
it is very challenging with these children.
It is definitely appropriate to try it,
it is good for those children
from such a low age to learn it a bit,
but it is definitely much more demanding than,
for children from second stage,
when I think that
some systematic involvement of distance learning
is simply relatively fine.
I have the same question for Jana Urbanová,
because you are an English teacher
for the younger children, so the
same question, just about language skills,
Is it possible to distance learning language
for such small children?
I just had to deal with the fact that
I had a first graders this year,
I'm lucky to be in a private school,
so we had good conditions.
The children,
I teach, have easy access to the Internet,
and at the same time most of them had parents
who sat there all the time and helped them there.
So it worked for us, but I'm very skeptical
about whether it would be widespread.
I do not believe that in ordinary families,
where the parent has no opportunity
or time to be with the child and
I'm not even talking about the fact
that they often don't have digital
equipment, so no. I can't imagine it.
Here the teaching is completely different,
very specific in the first grade,
really through the contact.
It must be through the video.
Because they can't read
and write yet, it can't be otherwise.
So I think it only works
if they have luxurious conditions.
Josef Kundrát, the transition to distance learning
also applies to university teachers
and related to this is the knowledge
and skills to use online platforms,
which are used in distance learning.
and one of the questions from Václav Kubljak
also points to that.
Did you feel sufficient support
in choosing a platform?
Did you have enough knowledge about platforms?
Did you have anyone to turn to
when you were actually thinking
about what online platform
to use for distance learning?
Did you know the advantages
and disadvantages of these platforms?
I was quite proactive in that,
so I actually started exploring
those options in the spring.
But as for colleagues, I assume that in the spring
it was not yet completely ideal.
There was actually that support,
but the question is how much
educators were willing to use it.
It depends on how many people
at the faculty said during the spring,
"I'll wait well and it will be gone in a month,
I will work by email
or by sharing and forwarding presentations".
Because after all, the college is really
a slightly different story
than the high school or elementary school.
So in the spring, I think it was a lot about
a person's willingness to actually
do something extra, but there was support.
If anyone needed something, our university
reacted very flexibly to it,
and now in the autumn, I think
that everyone has the support.
I think that the faculty approached
it as very constructive,
so my story is that there was actually
no bigger problem here,
and specifically for me, with the fact that
I have a good connection at home,
we have arranged for the department,
for example, good audio technology.
So I think that in some cases,
such as lectures, it is practically
a full-fledged replacement
for full-time teaching.
Well, of course now, the big question is,
what about the exam period
there was a lot of discussion,
how state examinations can take place online,
whether it is possible to actually to examine
and ensure that, students have fair conditions.
How to ensure, that students
will not cheat during exams.
This is a big topic and different universities,
as far as I know, have approached it differently.
I think we have not implemented
online examination period yet.
Everything was still offline
and it looks like, that in January
we will be able to do exams for small groups.
So I don't expect to be a big boom
in online exams,
it is a big topic now, it is necessary
and there should be more support.
I know that we have some options,
but lot of colleagues incline to do offline exams
and they avoid the whole dilemma
of how to actually do it and if it's right.
Thank you, four minutes left
and we have exhausted the questions
so I address to you, speakers.
If you still have something on your mind
or would like to respond on something
that has been said here, so you have room.
Mr. Lolák please.
I would comment on the clash of generations
that we talked about earlier.
One thing occurred to me, and that is,
I really feel that
roles of teachers are changing a bit nowadays
That while there used to be such an idea
that a teacher is someone wise
who passes on knowledge to younger people.
So nowadays the trend is heading towards
what is called guiding,
and we call on the various
alternative schools in Czechia.
When the teacher is not only there
to know the answers to the questions
and pass those answers on to the students.
But it's more for taking the students
in some of their ways,
because the world is very complicated
and each student has different interests.
So the teacher should support him
and not just tell him where to go.
With this is connected other thing.
As we talked about the older teachers
end to have a problem with digital technologies,
as Mr. Kunrát called digital clumsiness
So in the USA they initiatives,
that students teach their teachers digital skills,
because they just have them bigger.
And I like a certain equality or reciprocity
between the teacher and the student.
There is not just a teacher passing on
something, but there is a dialogue
and the people are learning from each other.
So I think that the trend in education is,
moving of the role of the teacher
from the one who dictates
to the role of student,
who learns together with children.
So I thank you for a very beneficial and
I would say a very interesting debate.
And thank you very much, either to Mr. Lalák here
or to you, online for joining us and
for being part of this panel.
Thank you very much to the audience